[0011] Resource element type validation (#69)
llvm/wg-hlsl: proposals/0010-resource-element-type-validation.md

* Proposal: [0010](0010-resource-element-type-validation.md)
* Author(s): [Joshua Batista](https://github.com/bob80905)
* Sponsor: Joshua Batista
* Status: **Under Consideration**
* Impacted Project(s): (LLVM)

* Issues: [#75676](https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/issues/75676)

## Introduction
Resources are often used in HLSL, with various resource element types (RETs).
For example:
```
RWBuffer<float> rwbuf: register(u0);
```
In this code, the RET is `float`, and the resource type is `RWBuffer`. The
resource type is not a `RawBuffer` variant, and so there is a distinct set
of rules that define valid RETs for this resource type.

> RETs for non-`RawBuffer` variants may include basic types (ints and uints of sizes 16

Reviewer: Maybe a list of resource types and what category they fall into would be helpful here?

I'm wondering if DXIL.rst needs to be updated to not refer to "RawBuffer" as an HLSL resource type.  Maybe it means ByteAddressBuffer?

DXIL.rst talks about "typed buffers".  Is that the right term for a "not raw buffer"?

Author: I think the full list would be way too long and would overpower this spec. There's a lot of resource types. 
It's strange, I think there are some types in that file that refer to a set of actual spellable types, but of course, RawBuffer isn't actually spellable. I don't think it's a typo.
Perhaps typed buffers is the right term, I'll double check.

Reviewer: Given a random buffer type, how do I determine if it is raw or typed?  I really think just having a list of the HLSL data types and whether they're raw or typed would help here.  I don't even think it is long, but obfuscating it in prose doesn't help.

* `[Append|Consume|RW]StructuredBuffer` - raw
* `[RW]Buffer` - typed
* `[RW]ByteAddressBuffer` - raw?
* `[Feedback]Texture*` - typed (I assume Feedback textures are typed)

> and 32, as well as half, float, vectors, and matrices of 4 elements or fewer).

Reviewer: > vectors, and matrices 

does the element type matter for vectors and matrices?

Author: I'll add that the element type may not exceed 32 bits.

Reviewer: I'm going to mark this as resolved and cover it in a new conversation.

> and 32, as well as half, float, vectors, and matrices of 4 elements or fewer).

Reviewer: DXC accepts double: https://godbolt.org/z/Y19TanY8r

Is that a bug in DXC? It looks like it knows to do two BufferLoad's and to make a double from them.

Author: @tex3d can confirm, but IIUC, yes it's a bug. This would cause undefined behavior at runtime, and we should disallow it.

Reviewer: I'm going to mark this as resolved and cover it in a new conversation.

> RETs for non-`RawBuffer` variants may include basic types (ints and uints of sizes 16
> and 32, as well as half, float, vectors, and matrices of 4 elements or fewer).
> Structs that contain fields of these basic types (where all fields in the struct have
> the same type) may also be RETs. 
> Structs that either have structs as fields or arrays of structs as fields may also be
> allowed, as long as there are at most 4 sub elements, and each sub element is at most
> 32 bits. Additionally, resource types are not allowed within an RET, even if the 
> underlying resource type has a primitive RET (i.e., `RWBuffer<int>` as an RET).

Reviewer: I find these big blocks of prose really hard to read.

```suggestion

RETs for non-`RawBuffer` variants may include:
* basic types: 
  * 16- and 32-bit int and uint
  * half and float
  * vectors
  * matrices containing 4 elements or fewer
* user defined types (structs / classes), as long as:
  * all fields in the struct have the same type
  * there are at most 4 sub elements, and each sub element is at most 32 bits
  
Resource types are not allowed within an RET, even if the underlying resource
type has a primitive RET (i.e., `RWBuffer<int>` as an RET).
```

Reviewer: I feel that there must be simpler way of explaining this...isn't it just "max of 4 elements and max of 128 bits"?

Maybe some examples could be used to illustrate how that rule applies, but I think there's just one rule?

Author: Used bulleted list instead.
If I were to use "max of 4 elements and max of 128 bits", a user may think 2 64-bit values would work. This would not work, it would cause undefined behavior at runtime. We must specify that each element may not exceed 32 bits.

Reviewer: Bulletted list looks much better! I'm going to mark this as resolved and cover the 64-bit value support in a new conversation.

> underlying resource type has a primitive RET (i.e., `RWBuffer<int>` as an RET).

Reviewer: > even if the underlying resource type has a primitive RET (i.e., `RWBuffer<int>` as an RET).

What is a "primitive RET"?  I think all this sentence has to say is "Resource types are not allowed."  

If it really is important for some reason to say something about the RET of a resource that someone is attempting to use as a RET then maybe "Resource types are not allowed, regardless of that resource's RET."  But I don't think it is.

Author: Simplified.

> RETs for `RawBuffer` variants are much less constrained, the only rule is that the RET
> may not be an incomplete type (a handle type or a resource type).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
RETs for raw buffer resources are much less constrained:
* it must be a complete type
* cannot contain a handle or resource type
```

Bullets to make it easier to read.  And added "cannot contain" to try and capture a struct that has another struct field that contains a resource or handle.

Are we avoiding saying "intangible" here?

Author: Simplified. We could use intangible, I just didn't end up saying it.

If someone writes `RWBuffer<MyCustomType>` and MyCustomType is not a 
valid RET, there there should be infrastructure to reject this RET and emit a message 
explaining why it was rejected as an RET.

## Motivation
Currently, there is an allow list of valid RETs. It must be modified with respect 
to this spec. Anything that is not an int, uint, nor a floating-point type, or vectors 
or matrices containing the aforementioned types, will be rejected. The allow list isn't
broad enough, because it doesn't include the case where the RET is user-defined. 
Ideally, a user should be able to determine how any user-defined structure is invalid 

> as an RET. Some system should be in place to more completely enforce the rules for 

Reviewer: > a user should be able to determine how any user-defined structure is invalid as an RET

Is this a statement about the type of diagnostics we need to emit, or something else?

Author: Yes, this is a statement highlighting the lack of detailed diagnostics emitted when an invalid UDT is used as an RET.
We want to emit detailed diagnostics, but primarily, emit *some* diagnostic, in the UDT as RET case. It gives motivation for this spec.

* Proposal: [0010](0010-resource-element-type-validation.md)
* Author(s): [Joshua Batista](https://github.com/bob80905)
* Sponsor: Joshua Batista
* Status: **Under Consideration**
* Impacted Project(s): (LLVM)

* Issues: [#75676](https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/issues/75676)

## Introduction
Resources are often used in HLSL, with various resource element types (RETs).
For example:
```
RWBuffer<float> rwbuf: register(u0);
```
In this code, the RET is `float`, and the resource type is `RWBuffer`.
There are two types of buffers, RawBuffers and TypedBuffers. `RWBuffer`

> is a TypedBuffer variant, and `StructuredBuffer` is a RawBuffer variant.

Reviewer: Given a random buffer type, how do I determine if it is raw or typed?  I really think just having a list of the HLSL data types and whether they're raw or typed would help here.  I don't even think it is long, but obfuscating it in prose doesn't help.

* `[Append|Consume|RW]StructuredBuffer` - raw
* `[RW]Buffer` - typed
* `[RW]ByteAddressBuffer` - raw?
* `[Feedback]Texture*` - typed (I assume Feedback textures are typed)
*

> There is a distinct set of rules that define valid RETs for RawBuffer types, 

Reviewer 2: Since StructuredBuffers are RawBuffers I assume you meant to compare RawBuffer to TypedBuffers here?

> and a separate set of rules that define valid RETs for `StructuredBuffer` types.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
and a separate set of rules that define valid RETs for TypedBuffer types.

```

These rules also depend on the target IR, SPIR-V or DXIL.

RETs for TypedBuffer variants may include:
* basic types: 
  * 16- and 32-bit int and uint
  * half and float
* vectors and matrices 
  * containing 4 elements or fewer
  * total size may not exceed 128 bits
* user defined types (structs / classes), as long as:
  * all fields in the struct have the same type
  * there are at most 4 sub elements
  * total size may not exceed 128 bits

RETs for RawBuffer variants are much less constrained:
* it must be a complete type

> * cannot contain a handle or resource type

Reviewer: What is the difference between a resource type and a type that contains a handle?  Aren't they the same thing?

```suggestion
* cannot contain a handle (such as resource types)

```

> * cannot contain a handle or resource type

Reviewer: Is this list complete? Are there going to be intangible types that aren't handles?

Author: I am unsure about our plan for the implementation of RayQuery, it will be intangible but will not be a resource. So, it may not have a handle. It might be feasible that there will exist intangible types that aren't handles.

Reviewer: So would it be better to say it cannot contain an intangible type?

valid and invalid RETs, as well as provide useful information on why they are invalid.

For example, when targeting DXIL IR, `RWBuffer<double4> b : register(u4);` will emit
an error in DXC, but will not in clang-dxc, despite the fact that `double4` is an 
invalid RET for TypedBuffers.

## Proposed solution

The proposed solution is to use some type_traits defined in the std library, create
some custom builtins to use as type_traits, and join them together to define a 
set of conceptual constraints for any RET that is used. These conceptual constraints
will be applied to every TypedBuffer resource type that is defined, so that all
TypedBuffer HLSL resources have the same rules about which RETs are valid. 
Validation will occur upon resource type instantiation. Additionally, certain 
resource types are RawBuffer variants, such as `StructuredBuffer`. These
resource types will have a different set of type-traits applied, which will
loosen constraints on viable RETs.

## Detailed design

In `clang\lib\Sema\HLSLExternalSemaSource.cpp`, `RWBuffer` is defined, along with 
`RasterizerOrderedBuffer` and `StructuredBuffer`. It is at this point that the 

> `type_traits` should be incorporated into these resource declarations. The 

Reviewer: I don't understand what the plan is for how these type traits are going to be used?  Just having a type trait doesn't automatically make diagnostics get emitted.

Are you planning to add static_asserts to the resource class definitions?  If so, I'd really like to see some examples of how this will be done.

> preprocessor will take responsibility for selecting the right set of type_traits

Reviewer: > preprocessor

Is this referring to the C preprocessor or something else?

Author: Originally, yes, but I think I can get access to what the target IR is in another way, so I'll rewrite this.

to check, depending on the target IR. If DXIL is given, then all of the TypedBuffer
`type_traits` will be applied on each TypedBuffer HLSL resource type. Otherwise, the
RawBuffer type_traits will be applied to each resource type. For every `type_trait`
that is not true for the given RET, an associated error message will be emitted.

The list of type_traits that will be available for use are described below:
| type_trait | Description|
|-|-|
| `__is_complete_type` | An RET should either be a complete type, or a user defined type that has been completely defined. |

> | `__is_resource_element_type` | An RET should be an arithmetic type, or a bool, or a vector or matrix or UDT containing such types. |

Reviewer 3: What is different between this and `!__builtin_hlsl_is_intangible`?

Author: For the purposes of the single static assert. I don't think that just because an RET is not intangible, it is always allowed as an RET. Testing the affirmative seems to be better for long term. For example, what if HLSL supports strings in the future? We'd want to disallow strings as RETs.

Reviewer 3: I'm not sure I agree about strings, but I'm also not sure how HLSL strings will be implemented, but my guess is that they'll be constant only so an offset and a length is the most I expect to represent the "value" of a string.

Setting aside strings since they aren't designed. As described, `__is_resource_element_type` is equivalent to `!__builtin_hlsl_is_intangible`, so I think we should have one trait not two because it simplifies the language rules.

Author: Talked with Chris offline, we both agree that `an arithmetic type, or a bool, or a vector or matrix or UDT containing such types` is exactly equivalent to `!__builtin_hlsl_is_intangible`, so I'll use that existing builtin.

| `__builtin_is_homogenous` | A TypedBuffer RET with the DXIL IR target should never have two different subelement types. |

> | `__builtin_is_contained_in_four_groups_of_thirty_two_bits` | A TypedBuffer RET with the DXIL IR target should not have more than 4 elements, and the total size of the RET may not exceed 128 bits. |

Reviewer 3: I feel like we could simplify this down to something like `__builtin_hlsl_is_line_vector_layout_compatible` to mark that a type is layout compatible with a [line-width](https://github.com/microsoft/hlsl-specs/pull/321/files#diff-29269dd46a5c0ae5cce91d3af91fce8d966c04887b38fe30ec54cb37cb28c5ceR300) vector. That would handle requiring homogeneousness, element count, and total size.

Author: Talked to Chris offline, we agreed `__builtin_hlsl_is_line_vector_layout_compatible` could be simplified by using the size_of builtin and other template tricks to verify vector length and total size in bytes.

Standard clang diagnostics for unsatisfied constraints will be used to report any 
invalid element types. Concepts required will differ depending on whether the 
resource is a typed buffer or a raw buffer. Until concepts are formally supported 
by HLSL, the concepts and constraints will be expressed directly in the AST via 
the HLSL external sema source.

## Detailed design

In `clang\lib\Sema\HLSLExternalSemaSource.cpp`, `RWBuffer` is defined, along with 
`RasterizerOrderedBuffer` and `StructuredBuffer`. It is at this point that the 
type traits should be incorporated into these resource declarations. A concept 
containing the relevant type traits will be applied to each resource declaration,
and there wil be sufficient context to determine the target IR.
If DXIL is given, then all of the typed buffer type traits will be applied on each
typed buffer HLSL resource type. Otherwise, the raw buffer type traits will be 
applied to each resource type. If a type trait is not true for the given 
RET, a corresponding error message will be emitted.

The list of type traits that will be available for use are described below:
| type trait | Description|
|-|-|

> | `__is_complete_type` | An RET should either be a complete type, or a user defined type that has been completely defined. |

Reviewer 3: We may not actually need `__is_complete_type`. I know that the type needs to be complete, but `__is_intangible` will error if the type is incomplete.

> * Proposal: [0010](0010-resource-element-type-validation.md)

Reviewer 3: nit: I think we already have a proposal 10, so make sure to update the number before merging.

* Author(s): [Joshua Batista](https://github.com/bob80905)
* Sponsor: Joshua Batista
* Status: **Under Consideration**
* Impacted Project(s): (LLVM)
* Issues: [#75676](https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/issues/75676)

## Introduction
Resources are often used in HLSL, with various resource element types.

For example:
```
RWBuffer<float> rwbuf: register(u0);
```
In this code, the element type is `float`, and the resource type is `RWBuffer`.
`RWBuffer`, along with some other buffers and textures, fall under the "typed buffer"
category. Other buffer resources are categorized as "raw buffers". 
Below is a description of resources that are considered "typed buffers" vs "raw buffers".
* typed buffers
  * [RW|RasterizerOrdered]Buffer
  * [Feedback]Texture*
* raw buffers
  * [Append|Consume|RW|RasterizerOrdered]StructuredBuffer
  * [RW]ByteAddressBuffer

There is a distinct set of rules that define valid element types for typed buffer resources

> and valid element types for raw buffer resources.

Reviewer 4: Nit: I think the language of "element types" applied to "raw buffer resources" is a little problematic.  StructuredBuffer has an element (or struct) type.  ByteAddressBuffer does not have an "element type", but has templated Load/Store operations that take a type.

Perhaps being more explicit could just be the answer:
```suggestion
and valid element types for `*StructuredBuffer` resources and
`*ByteAddressBuffer` Load/Store operations.
```

Element types for typed buffer resources:
* Are not intangible (e.g., isn't a resource type)
* Must be vectors or scalars of arithmetic types, not bools nor enums nor arrays
* Should be a scalar or homogenous vector of a floating-point or integer type, with a maximum of 4 components after translating 64-bit components into pairs of uint32_t components
Element types for raw buffer resources:
* Are not intangible (e.g., isn't a resource type)

> * All constituent types must be arithmetic types or bools or enums

Reviewer 4: Other than the language nit of "Element types for raw buffer resources", is there anything that's tangible which isn't allowed?  If not I don't think we need the next point.

If we still need this point, does "arithmetic types or bools or enums" sound inclusive of aggregates of such types?  It's not clear to me that it is.

Author: I believe we are disallowing arrays. The second point doesn't sound inclusive of this, I'll fix this.

Author: I don't think there's anything that's tangible which isn't allowed. I've removed the second point.

Resource types are never allowed as element types (i.e., `RWBuffer<int>` as an element type).
If someone writes `RWBuffer<MyCustomType>` and MyCustomType is not a valid element type, 
there should be infrastructure to reject this element type and emit a message explaining 

> why it was rejected as an element type.

Reviewer 4: Isn't the intangible property sufficient, plus saying that user defined types are made intangible when containing intangible types.

Author: This is indeed repeating the same information, but I think it's a simpler, alternative way to convey more information, that draws the reader to a conclusion they may not have come to.

Reviewer 3: The point of this is to provide a roadmap for implementation, not documentation for users. Simplifying the language and not repeating things should be the goal.

We should be able to say that cannot be intangible types. We don't even need to go into details about what an intangible type is, we can just link to the language spec for that information.

valid and invalid element types, as well as provide useful information on why they are invalid.

For example, `RWBuffer<double4> b : register(u4);` will emit an error in DXC, but will not in 
clang-dxc, despite the fact that `double4` is an invalid element type for typed buffers.

## Proposed solution

The proposed solution is to modify the declaration of each resource declared in 
`clang\lib\Sema\HLSLExternalSemaSource.cpp` and insert into each representative
AST node a concept. The AST node will be created as if the C++20 `concept` keyword
was parsed and applied to the declaration. The concept will be used to validate the
given element type, and will emit errors when the given element type is invalid. 
Although concepts are not currently supported in HLSL, we expect support to be 
added at some point in the future. Meanwhile, because LLVM does support concepts, 
we can make use of them when constructing the AST in Sema.

Two builtins will be used to validate typed buffer element types. Any resource 
element type may not be intangible, so the negation of `__builtin_hlsl_is_intangible`
will be used for both typed and raw buffer resources.

> A new built-in, `__builtin_hlsl_typed_element_compatible`, will be added in order

Reviewer 3: Not to bike shed, but this builtin name seems odd to me because it doesn't really describe what this is an element of. Maybe `__builtin_hlsl_typed_buffer_element_compatible` or `__builtin_hlsl_typed_resource_element_compatible` to add the missing context?

Author: Sounds good, I'll go with typed resource.

explaining why it was rejected as an RET.

## Motivation
Currently, there is an allow list of valid RETs. It must be modified with respect 
to this spec. Anything that is not a valid RET will be rejected. The allow list isn't
broad enough, because there is no case where the RET is user-defined for a raw buffer.
Ideally, a user should be able to determine how any user-defined structure is invalid 
as an RET. Some system should be in place to more completely enforce the rules for 
valid and invalid RETs, as well as provide useful information on why they are invalid.

For example, when targeting DXIL IR, `RWBuffer<double4> b : register(u4);` will emit
an error in DXC, but will not in clang-dxc, despite the fact that `double4` is an 
invalid RET for typed buffers.

## Proposed solution

The proposed solution is to modify the declaration of each resource declared in 
`clang\lib\Sema\HLSLExternalSemaSource.cpp` and insert into each representative
AST node a concept. The AST node will be created as if the C++20 `concept` keyword
was parsed and applied to the declaration. The concept will be used to validate the

> given RET, and will emit errors when the given RET is invalid.

Reviewer: Wonder if something along these lines would help capture some of the discussions that led up to this decision?

> Requirements such as this are well expressed using the C++20 concepts. These aren't currently supported
> in HLSL, but we expect support to be added at some point in the future. However, LLVM does support
> concepts and it is possible to make use of them even if they can't be spelled in HLSL source code. The way
> to do this is to construct the appropriate AST nodes in Sema. In fact, this is already done for other
> non-spellable aspects of resources in `HLSLExternalSemaSource.cpp`, and so we have a natural place to
> add these concepts.

> Specifically, a new built-in, `__builtin_hlsl_is_line_vector_layout_compatible`, 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A new built-in, `__builtin_hlsl_is_line_vector_layout_compatible`, 

```

RWBuffer<oneFloat> r6; // valid
RWBuffer<twoInt> r7; // valid
RWBuffer<threeInts> r8; // valid
RWBuffer<notHomogenous> r9; // invalid, all template type components must have the same type, DXC fails
StructuredBuffer<notHomogenous> r9Structured; // valid
RWBuffer<depthDiff> r10; // invalid, all template type components must have the same type, DXC fails
RWBuffer<EightElements> r11; // invalid, > 4 elements and > 16 bytes, DXC fails 
// This would be caught by __builtin_hlsl_is_line_vector_layout_compatible
StructuredBuffer<EightElements> r9Structured; // valid
RWBuffer<EightHalves> r12; // invalid, > 4 elements, DXC fails
// This would be caught by __builtin_hlsl_is_line_vector_layout_compatible
StructuredBuffer<EightHalves> r12Structured; // valid
RWBuffer<oneIntWithVec> r13; // valid
RWBuffer<weirdStruct> r14; // valid
RWBuffer<RWBuffer<int> > r15; // invalid - the RET has a handle with unknown size, thus it is an intangible RET.
// the type trait that would catch this is the negation of `__is_intangible`
```

Below is a sample C++ implementation of the `RWBuffer` resource type, which is a typed buffer variant.

> This code would exist within an hlsl header, but concepts are not implemented in HLSL. However, the AST node

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This code would exist within an hlsl header, but concepts are not implemented in HLSL. Instead, the AST node

```

associated with RWBuffers is constructed as if this code was read and parsed by the compiler.
```
#include <type_traits>

namespace hlsl {

> template<typename T>

Reviewer: Looks like something got edited away here.

I expect you'll want to think of this as something like:
```c++
template<typename RET>
concept TypedResourceElementType = 
    __builtin_hlsl_is_line_vector_layout_compatible<RET>() &&
    !std::is_enum_v<RET> && !std::is_same_v<RET, bool>;

template<typename RET>
    requires TypedResourceElementType<RET>
struct Buffer 
{
};
```

(https://godbolt.org/z/MdfYhYqh9)

template<typename T> requires __builtin_hlsl_is_line_vector_layout_compatible(T)
 && !__is_intangible(T) && !isa<bool> && !isa<enum>
struct RWBuffer {
    T Val;
};

// doesn't need __builtin_hlsl_is_line_vector_layout_compatible, because this is a raw buffer
// also, raw buffers allow bools and enums as constituent types
template<typename T> requires !__is_intangible(T)
struct StructuredBuffer {
    T Val;
};
}

```

## Alternatives considered (Optional)
We could instead implement a diagnostic function that checks each of these conceptual constraints in
one place, either in Sema or CodeGen, but this would prevent us from defining a single header where 
all resource information is localized.

Another alternative considered was creating a builtin called `__is_valid_resource_element_type`, to
check all possible valid resource element types, rather than just checking that the RET is not intangible.
This is unneeded because all primitive non-intangible types are valid RETs.

## Acknowledgments (Optional)

> Damyan Pepper
> Chris Bieneman
> Greg Roth
> Sarah Spall
> Tex Riddell
> Justin Bogner

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Damyan Pepper
* Chris Bieneman
* Greg Roth
* Sarah Spall
* Tex Riddell
* Justin Bogner
```

* Proposal: [0010](0010-resource-element-type-validation.md)
* Author(s): [Joshua Batista](https://github.com/bob80905)
* Sponsor: Joshua Batista
* Status: **Under Consideration**
* Impacted Project(s): (LLVM)
* Issues: [#75676](https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/issues/75676)

## Introduction

> Resources are often used in HLSL, with various resource element types (RETs).

Reviewer 4: I'm not a fan of the new acronym "RET", since it collides so readily with an instruction for return from procedure.

I think I'd prefer "resource element type" or "element type" or "resource element", or just "element" for short where the context is sufficient.

Reviewer 4: One thought is to use the term "typed resource element" (maybe "TRE" for short, but I'm not sure it's necessary).  That would be a specific thing with specific constraints, avoiding the collision with the `StructuredBuffer` element type or `ByteAddressBuffer` templated `Load`/`Store` element type where the constraints are different.

Author: I see how typed resource element is more specific, though I'd like to address element types in this spec specifically. How does TRET (typed resource element types) sound? There are many references to this concept so I think an abbreviation is worthwhile.

Reviewer 5: I'm not a fan of the RET acronym either. I agree with Tex that in many places it can be shortened to "element type", "resource element", or just "element" or "type".

Author: Ok, I'll remove acronyms.

Reviewer 5: Thanks Josh! In my opinion it looks much cleaner now.

For example:
```
RWBuffer<float> rwbuf: register(u0);
```
In this code, the RET is `float`, and the resource type is `RWBuffer`.

> All resources can be placed in two categories, raw buffers and typed buffers. 

Reviewer 4: This document would be much clearer if it focused only on HLSL "typed resource element" type constraints.

Raw buffers don't have the same sort of element type, at least not in the same sense.  In fact, strictly speaking "raw buffers" are ByteAddressBuffers, which don't have an element type at all (are treated as raw bits).  You can either use the ordinary Load[2-4]/Store methods which operate on uint1-4 granularity, or use the templated versions which allow you to specify your current interpretation of bits directly for an operation.  That's still not the "element type" of the resource.

For structured buffers, these do have a structure type, also known as an element type, but again, not in the same sense as for typed resources.

I think it's more confusing to try to describe both side-by-side with the same element terminology throughout the same document.

The constraints applied to the raw/structured buffer accesses are actually more broadly applicable than a "resource element type".  For instance, the same rules apply for raytracing or mesh payload structures, ray tracing attribute structures, groupshared variable types, ConstantBuffer/TextureBuffer template types, and really any structure that can be used to load or store host memory outside the typed resource case.

Reviewer 4: Not to mention that this does not describe "all resources" as stated.

Author: Ok, I'll change the spec so that it makes no mention of raw buffers.

Reviewer: Is this really necessary?  Do we need to further churn the spec for this?

Maybe "All resources" could be rewritten as "All buffer resources" if there's concern about that, but I don't know if we need to do another big reworking of this document.

Reviewer 5: Yeah, I think the raw buffers should stay in. Their element types need to be validated by `!__builtin_hlsl_is_intangible`.

Below is a description of all resources and their corresponding categories
* raw buffers
  * [Append|Consume|RW|RasterizerOrdered]StructuredBuffer
  * [RW]ByteAddressBuffer
* typed buffers
  * [RW|RasterizerOrdered]Buffer
  * [Feedback]Texture*

There is a distinct set of rules that define valid RETs for raw buffer resources, 
and a separate set of rules that define valid RETs for typed buffer resources.

RETs for typed buffer resources:
* Are not intangible (e.g., isn't a resource type)

> * Must be vectors or scalars of arithmetic types, not bools nor enums nor arrays

Reviewer 5: From what I read in this PR comments `bool`s are allowed for typed buffers.

Author: They aren't. Although is_intangible will not return false in the case a bool is detected, the other builtin, which is currently named is line vector layout compatible, will return false if a bool is detected

> * The type should be line-vector layout compatible (homogenous, at most 4 elements, and at most 128 bits in size) 

Reviewer 4: I have always had a problem with this terminology.
- It's inventing new terminology not connected to any prior terminology used for the concept to which it applies: "line-vector"?  It's trying to sound more general than it actually is.
- If you were to think about what it could/should be referring to, you could justifiably think it's about what fits into one constant buffer row (line?) in the legacy (current) constant buffer layout.  But that would be a mistake, since the rules are different.  (for example, you can put 8 native 16-bit values or a struct containing non-homogenous types in one row)
- It implies that this type is used in the (memory) layout of the resource itself.  It's not: the element stored and the layout is dependent on runtime factors: the DXGI resource type and device-dependent factors.  The element type in HLSL for a typed resource is just how you want to interpret the values loaded from that up-to-4-component typed resource element.
- The description sounds like it would support non-homogenous types (a struct with several different types that fit should work, as it would for constant buffers)
- This 128-bit restriction sounds equivalent, but hides the true meaning: each 64-bit component in HLSL is translated to 2-32-bit components for the resource element type, with a bitcast for translation.  This has implications for the actual element type used, compatible DXGI type mapping, and allowed operations.  This has a limit of 2 64-bit components because those 2 components expand into a 4 component element type, not because it's 128 bits in size.
- We could probably create specializations that handle 64-bit type translation directly to/from the translated element type in our HLSL header, rather than adding special-case code to the compiler.  In this scenario, the real element type for the resource does not use a 64-bit type as the component type, but uses the translated element type with 32-bit uint components instead.

I would rather a more specific term be used for the more specific typed resource element constraint.

How about "typed-element compatible" and `__builtin_hlsl_typed_element_compatible`?
- A "typed-element" flows from existing terminology: typed resources are textures and buffers with a DXGI type applying to the resource view descriptor at runtime.  These support translation upon load/store to the HLSL element type used in a shader (depending on the types at either end and the operation being performed).
- The element must be a scalar or vector of an integer or floating point type with a maximum of 4 components.  All loads and stores are performed at element granularity, which is a 4 component vector (or struct) in the shader IR, whether or not all those components are read/defined.
- If a 64-bit component type is used in HLSL, each 64-bit value maps to 2-32-bit `uint` components which will be reinterpreted together as the 64-bit value in HLSL.  This has implications for supported operations, and the maximum number of 64-bit components allowed.  `double2` or `[u]int64_t2` becomes `uint4`, which is the maximum number of components, and because the real component used is integer, it triggers those operation restrictions as well.

These above rules and description would apply to this "typed-element compatible"/`__builtin_hlsl_typed_element_compatible` constraint.

The short description could be:
- slightly modified: "at most 4 homogenous scalars, and at most 128 bits in total size" (avoiding using "element" for scalar/component since the whole thing is the element type)
- or "at most 4 homogenous scalars after translation of 64-bit scalars into pairs of uint32_t scalars".  This makes the implied translation clear right in the short constraint description.
- or subsume the scalar or vector and component type rule:
  "scalar or vector of a floating-point or integer type, with a maximum of 4 components after translating 64-bit components into pairs of `uint32_t` components"

There some additional constraints on the element type relating to the way the resource is used (methods called), but these would need to be enforced separately on the method calls:
- If comparison sample (`SampleCmp*`) methods are used, the element type in HLSL must be a scalar floating point type of at most 32-bits.
- If other `Sample` methods are used, integer components are only allowed in the element type when the shader model is 6.7 or greater.  This is triggered by the use of double components because they break down into 2 `uint32_t` components.
There are additional runtime restrictions for legal type combinations between the shader and the DXGI type, but these cannot be enforced by the compiler when they depend on runtime state.  For instance: typed UAVs using a unorm or snorm DXGI type need to have a matching unorm float or snorm float component type in the HLSL resource element declaration.

Reviewer: The naming used here is intended to be consistent with https://github.com/microsoft/hlsl-specs/pull/321. Please comment on that PR if you think we need to adjust the naming there.

If the target is SPIR-V, then only the set of rules for raw buffers apply. Typed buffers
like `RWBuffer` may have RETs that exceed 128 bits, for example, if the target 
IR is SPIR-V. The typed buffer rules above are only enforced when the IR target is DXIL.

If someone writes `RWBuffer<MyCustomType>` and MyCustomType is not a 
valid RET, there should be infrastructure to reject this RET and emit a message 
explaining why it was rejected as an RET.

## Motivation
Currently, there is an allow list of valid RETs. It must be modified with respect 
to this spec. Anything that is not a valid RET will be rejected. The allow list isn't
broad enough, because it doesn't include the case where the RET is user-defined. 
Ideally, a user should be able to determine how any user-defined structure is invalid 
as an RET. Some system should be in place to more completely enforce the rules for 
valid and invalid RETs, as well as provide useful information on why they are invalid.

For example, when targeting DXIL IR, `RWBuffer<double4> b : register(u4);` will emit
an error in DXC, but will not in clang-dxc, despite the fact that `double4` is an 
invalid RET for typed buffers.

## Proposed solution

> The proposed solution is to use some type_traits defined in the std library, create
> some custom builtins to use as type_traits, and join them together to define a 
> set of conceptual constraints for any RET that is used. These conceptual constraints
> will be applied to every typed buffer resource type that is defined, so that all
> typed buffer HLSL resources have the same rules about which RETs are valid. 
> Validation will occur upon resource type instantiation. Additionally, certain 
> resource types are raw buffer variants, such as `StructuredBuffer`. These resource 
> types will have a different set of type-traits applied, which will loosen constraints
> on viable RETs. The type traits will be validated as `concepts`, which is a feature 
> introduced in C++20 to statically validate a type.

Reviewer: I think this paragraph can be simplified somewhat, I suspect it has evolved into it's current form.

```suggestion
The proposed solution is to use C++20 concepts to validate the element type.
A new built-in, `__builtin_is_homogenous`, will be added in order to express constraints
that can't currently be expressed in pure HLSL code. Standard clang diagnostics for 
unsatisfied constrints will be used to report any invalid element types.

Until concepts are formally supported by HLSL, the concepts and constraints 
will be expressed directly in the AST via the HLSL external sema source.
```

## Detailed design

In `clang\lib\Sema\HLSLExternalSemaSource.cpp`, `RWBuffer` is defined, along with 
`RasterizerOrderedBuffer` and `StructuredBuffer`. It is at this point that the 

> `type_traits` should be incorporated into these resource declarations. A concept 

Reviewer: Apart from the header, there isn't really a thing in the code called `type_traits` so I don't think we should be marking it as code in the markdown.

In almost all cases I think this should be "type traits".

|-|-|

> | `__is_intangible` | An RET should be an arithmetic type, bool, enum, or a vector or matrix or UDT containing such types. This is equivalent to validating that the RET is not intangible. This will error when given an incomplete type. |

Reviewer 5: The full name is `__builtin_hlsl_is_intangible` and I would probably use list it here with a negation `!__builtin_hlsl_is_intangible`, otherwise it does not match the description on the right.

If DXIL is given, then all of the typed buffer `type_traits` will be applied on each
typed buffer HLSL resource type. Otherwise, the raw buffer type_traits will be 
applied to each resource type. If a `type_trait` is not true for the given 
RET, a corresponding error message will be emitted.

The list of type_traits that will be available for use are described below:
| type_trait | Description|
|-|-|
| `__is_complete_type` | An RET should either be a complete type, or a user defined type that has been completely defined. |
| `__is_intangible` | An RET should be an arithmetic type, or a bool, or a vector or matrix or UDT containing such types. This is equivalent to validating that the RET is not intangible. |

> | `__builtin_is_homogenous` | A typed buffer RET with the DXIL IR target should never have two different subelement types. |

Reviewer: ```__builtin_is_homogenous``` will have an interesting definition. For example, for it to be useful here, it'll need to return true here:

```
struct Foo {
    int2 x;
};

struct Type {
    Foo f;
    int2 x;
};
```

However, with a very generalized name like this I think that might be confusing for other scenarios.

Author: Yes, its definition will use a function that's already been defined, that collects all the leaf types and puts them in a small vector.  The first element in this small vector will be compared to each subsequent element, and any mismatches will result in false, true otherwise. 
Other names that could be considered: __builtin_is_leaf_type_homogenous, __builtin_is_sub_element_homogenous?

needed to verify these, since they can be checked directly using template techniques
and the `sizeof` builtin.

* Examples:
```
// targeting DXIL
struct oneInt {
	int i;
};
struct twoInt {
   int aa;
   int ab;
};
struct a {
   oneInt bx;
   int i;
};
struct b;
struct c {
  oneInt ca;
  float1 cb;
};
struct d {
  twoInt x[2];
  twoInt y[2];
};
RWBuffer<double2> r0; // valid - RET fits in 4 32-bit quantities
RWBuffer<int> r1; // valid
RWBuffer<float> r2; // valid
RWBuffer<float4> r3; // valid
RWBuffer<oneInt> r4; // valid
RWBuffer<oneInt> r5; // valid - all fields are valid primitive types
RWBuffer<a> r6; // valid - all leaf types are valid primitive types, and homogenous

RWBuffer<b> r7; // invalid - the RET isn't complete, the definition is missing. 
// the type_trait that would catch this is `__is_complete_type`

RWBuffer<c> r8; // invalid - struct `oneInt` has int types, and this is not homogenous with the float1 contained in `c`. 
// the type_trait that would catch this is `__builtin_is_homogenous`

StructuredBuffer<c> r8Structured; // valid

RWBuffer<d> r9; // invalid - the struct f cannot be grouped into 4 32-bit quantities.

> // no type_trait would catch this, but it would be caught by a concept failure, using the sizeof builtin.

Reviewer: I think that this is invalid just because `sizeof(d) > 16`, nothing to do with whether or not it can be grouped into 4 32-bit values.

StructuredBuffer<d> r9Structured; // valid

RWBuffer<RWBuffer<int> > r10; // invalid - the RET has a handle with unknown size, thus it is an intangible RET.
// the type trait that would catch this is `!__is_intangible`

> ```

Reviewer: How about:

```
struct EightHalves { half x[8] };  // sizeof(EightHalves) == 16
RWBuffer<EightHalves> b;
```

I think this should be rejected because it ends up with 8 components, but I don't see any trait proposed that handles element count.

Author: There's no trait that handles element count or total RET size, both of those constraints will be verified by template magic and the `sizeof` builtin. I've added that example to further clarify.

Author: Well, magic was a way for me to summarize this line of code in the spec:
`concept is_valid_line_vector = sizeof(T) <= 16 && vector_type_info<T>::Size <= 4;`
This is specifically the plan to implement the element count check and the total size in bytes check.
We get the templated type, T, and run sizeof on it, making sure it's at most 16. Also, if the given templated type is a vector, the Size variable extracts the vector element count, and we make sure that it's at most 4.
`is_valid_line_vector` will only be checked when instantiating RWBuffer when the RET is detected to be a vector type.

Reviewer: In the EightHalves example, EightHalves isn't a vector, it is a struct.

Also, how about:

```
struct EightHalvesAnotherWay {
   half a[4];
   half b[3];
   half c;
};
```

Author: My sample does seem to fail with UDTs, I've made a big update.

From this subvector, the first element will be compared to all elements in the vector,
and any mismatches will return false.
Typed buffer RETs with the DXIL IR target will need have a vector length that is
at most 4, and the total size in bytes is at most 16. However, type_traits are not
needed to verify these, since they can be checked directly using template techniques
and the `sizeof` builtin.

* Examples:
```
// targeting DXIL
struct oneInt {
	int i;
};
struct twoInt {
   int aa;
   int ab;
};
struct a {
   oneInt bx;
   int i;
};
struct b;
struct c {
  oneInt ca;
  float1 cb;
};
struct d {
  twoInt x[2];
  twoInt y[2];
};
RWBuffer<double2> r0; // valid - RET fits in 4 32-bit quantities
RWBuffer<int> r1; // valid
RWBuffer<float> r2; // valid
RWBuffer<float4> r3; // valid
RWBuffer<oneInt> r4; // valid
RWBuffer<oneInt> r5; // valid - all fields are valid primitive types
RWBuffer<a> r6; // valid - all leaf types are valid primitive types, and homogenous

// diagnostic: "resource element type 'b' has incomplete definition"
RWBuffer<b> r7; // invalid - the RET isn't complete, the definition is missing. 
// the type_trait that would catch this is `__is_complete_type`

> // diagnostic: "resource element type 'c' has non-homogenous aggregate type"

Reviewer: With the proposed concepts-based implementation do you think you'll be able to get these exact diagnostics?

Author: No, I don't think the diagnostics are any longer controllable.
For example, if an RET is a vector of 8 doubles, we'd expect these diagnostics:

```
<source>:41:5: error: constraints not satisfied for class template 'RWBuffer' [with T = double __attribute__((ext_vector_type(8)))]
   41 |     RWBuffer<vector<double, 8>> Buf;
      |     ^~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
<source>:29:32: note: because '!is_vector_type<double __attribute__((ext_vector_type(8)))>::value' evaluated to false
   29 | template<typename T> requires (!is_vector_type<T>::value) || (is_spirv_target || is_valid_line_vector<T>) && __is_complete_type(T)
      |                                ^
<source>:29:63: note: and 'is_spirv_target' evaluated to false
   29 | template<typename T> requires (!is_vector_type<T>::value) || (is_spirv_target || is_valid_line_vector<T>) && __is_complete_type(T)
      |                                                               ^
<source>:29:82: note: and 'double __attribute__((ext_vector_type(8)))' (vector of 8 'double' values) does not satisfy 'is_valid_line_vector'
   29 | template<typename T> requires (!is_vector_type<T>::value) || (is_spirv_target || is_valid_line_vector<T>) && __is_complete_type(T)
      |                                                                                  ^
<source>:27:60: note: because 'sizeof(double __attribute__((ext_vector_type(8)))) <= 16' (64 <= 16) evaluated to false
   27 | concept is_valid_line_vector = is_vector_type<T>::value && sizeof(T) <= 16 && vector_type_info<T>::Size <= 4;
      | 
```

I'll remove the expected diagnostics.

Reviewer: We should have some text in here saying that we're going to rely on the standard diagnostics emitted when constraints aren't satisfied.

buffer resource. The builtin is described below. Standard clang diagnostics for
unsatisfied constraints will be used to report any invalid element types. Until 
concepts are formally supported by HLSL, the concepts and constraints will be 
expressed only in the AST via the HLSL external sema source.

## Detailed design

In `clang\lib\Sema\HLSLExternalSemaSource.cpp`, `RWBuffer` is defined, along with 
`RasterizerOrderedBuffer` and `StructuredBuffer`. It is at this point that the 
concept would be incorporated into these resource declarations. A concept representing
the relevant constraints will be applied to each resource declaration. If a concept
is not true for the given element type, a corresponding error message will be emitted.

The list of builtins to be used as type traits that will be available for
concept definition are described below:
| type trait | Description|
|-|-|
| `!__builtin_hlsl_is_intangible ` | An element type should be an arithmetic type, bool, enum, or a vector or matrix or UDT containing such types. This is equivalent to validating that the element type is not intangible. This will error when given an incomplete type. |

> | `__builtin_hlsl_typed_element_compatible ` | A typed buffer element type should never have two different subelement types. Line vector layout compatible also requires at most 4 elements, and a total size of at most 16 bytes. The builtin will also disallow the element type if any of its constituent types are enums or bools. |

Reviewer 5: This still uses the previous term "Line vector layout compatible".

For typed buffers, `__builtin_hlsl_typed_element_compatible` and 
`!__builtin_hlsl_is_intangible` needs to be true. `__builtin_hlsl_typed_element_compatible`
will be used to ensure homogeneity. It will use `BuildFlattenedTypeList` to retrieve a small
vector of the subelement types. From this subvector, the first element will be compared to 
all elements in the vector, and any mismatches will return false. Typed buffer element types
will also need to have at most 4 subelements, after splitting 64-bit subelements into two 32-bit
subelements, which will also be verified by `__builtin_hlsl_is_line_vector_layout_compatible`.
Finally, the `__builtin_hlsl_typed_element_compatible` will validate that there are no bools or

> enums present in any component of the type.

Reviewer 5: Implementation detail - this should not be included in the spec.

```
RWBuffer<float> rwbuf: register(u0);
```
In this code, the RET is `float`, and the resource type is `RWBuffer`.

> There are two types of buffers, RawBuffers and TypedBuffers. `RWBuffer`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are two types of buffers, raw buffers and typed buffers. `RWBuffer`

```

(etc.)

as an RET. Some system should be in place to more completely enforce the rules for 
valid and invalid RETs, as well as provide useful information on why they are invalid.

For example, when targeting DXIL IR, `RWBuffer<double4> b : register(u4);` will emit
an error in DXC, but will not in clang-dxc, despite the fact that `double4` is an 
invalid RET for typed buffers.

## Proposed solution

The proposed solution is to use some type_traits defined in the std library, create
some custom builtins to use as type_traits, and join them together to define a 
set of conceptual constraints for any RET that is used. These conceptual constraints
will be applied to every typed buffer resource type that is defined, so that all
typed buffer HLSL resources have the same rules about which RETs are valid. 
Validation will occur upon resource type instantiation. Additionally, certain 
resource types are raw buffer variants, such as `StructuredBuffer`. These resource 
types will have a different set of type-traits applied, which will loosen constraints
on viable RETs. The type traits will be validated as `concepts`, which is a feature 

> introduced in C++20 to statically validate a type.

Reviewer: Are we really planning on adding concepts to HLSL?

Author: Further discussion is necessary, though it seems easy to add to HLSL. However, while resource definitions are in HLSLExternalSemaSource.cpp, a C++ file, we can use concepts along with the resource definitions. If we plan to move resource definitions to HLSL files, we will either need to add concepts to HLSL, or implement RET validation some other way. The spec as it stands now specifies a design while resources are still defined in a C++ file though.

  constexpr static unsigned Size = N;
};

> const bool is_spirv_target = getASTContext().getTargetInfo().getTriple().isSPIRV();

Reviewer: I'm confused - is this code sample HLSL code, or part of the Clang implementation?

Author: It would be part of the clang implementation, C++ code within HLSLExternalSemaSource.cpp. I'll make that clearer.

Reviewer: Apart from line 185, this looks like what we'd write in hlsl.h, but because it isn't all currently spellable we'd have to implement it in HLSLExternalSemaSource.cpp by constructing AST nodes.

Reviewer 3: We could define such a thing in the HLSL headers by doing something like:

```c
#if __is_target_arch(spirv)
constexpr bool is_spirv_target = true;
#else
constexpr bool is_spirv_target = false;
#endif
```

In the External Sema Source we can just generate the constraints differently based on the target.
